feat!: add static/dynamic context (#171)
open-feature/spec: specification/sections/02-providers.md

> In cases of abnormal execution, the `resolution details` structure's `error message` field **MAY** contain a string containing additional detail about the nature of the error.

### 2.4 Initialization

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

#### Requirement 2.4.1

> The `provider` interface **MUST** define an `initialize` function which accepts the global `evaluation context` as a argument, which can be optionally implemented to perform initialization logic relevant to the provider.

```
class MyProvider implements Provider {
  //...

  void initialize(EvaluationContext initialContext) {
    /*
      A hypothetical initialization function: connect to a flag database, then pass a callback which fires PROVIDER_READY
    */
    this.connectToDatabase(() => this.emitEvent(ProviderEvents.READY));
  }

  //...
}
```

### 2.5. Provider context reconciliation

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

> Client-focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.
```
Perhaps I've misunderstood but it seems to me that `single-context` encompasses client?

Author: Ya, I think I can change the language.

I'm also wondering if we should make this requirement conditional on single-context or not. Open to thoughts on that.

#### Requirement 2.5.1

> > The provider interface **MUST** define an `on context set` handler, which takes a argument for the previous context, and the newly set context, and which can be optionally implemented to reconcile any stored state pertaining to the global evaluation context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The provider interface **MUST** define an `on context set` handler, which takes an argument for the previous context, and the newly set context, and which can be optionally implemented to reconcile any stored state pertaining to the global evaluation context.
```

Especially in single-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs my maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.
The `on context set` handler provides a mechanism to update this state, often by re-evaluating flags in bulk with respect to the new context.

```

>   // run the myOnReadyHandler function when the 

Reviewer: when the ...

Author: This isn't even the correct example, I missed this one!

#### Requirement 2.3.3

> In cases of abnormal execution, the `resolution details` structure's `error message` field **MAY** contain a string containing additional detail about the nature of the error.

### 2.4 Initialization

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

#### Requirement 2.4.1

> > The `provider` interface **MUST** define an optional `initialize` function, which accepts the global `evaluation context` as an argument and performs initialization logic relevant to the provider.

Reviewer 2: What's the benefit of forcing this initialize function, rather than doing the initialization implicitly in the constructor?

Author: The constructor can't have the evaluation context. At initialization, the SDK can provide a context to the provider if one has been set. It makes things a bit more consistent with respect to the `onContextSet` handler: the provider author now has a few well-defined points at which to perform bulk evaluation/caching if that's relevant to them.

> > The `provider` interface **MUST** define an optional `initialize` function, which accepts the global `evaluation context` as an argument and performs initialization logic relevant to the provider.

Author: ```suggestion
> The `provider` **MAY** define an optional `initialize` function, which accepts the global `evaluation context` as an argument and performs initialization logic relevant to the provider.
```

> > The `provider` interface **MUST** define an `initialize` function which accepts the global `evaluation context` as a argument, and which can be optionally implemented to perform initialization logic relevant to the provider.

Reviewer 3: Is the evaluation context required, or is it optional. Seems that we shouldn't REQUIRE that something be passed here, given that we're now adding more plumbing for updating the context and informing the provider that that's occured.

Could we make it optional and say that if it's not provided then the intial evaulation context defaults to a special-case "empty context", which we define as having no targeting key and no additional fields?

Author: I think the problem here is that the sentence is ambiguous.  When I said `and which can be optionally implemented` I was saying the `initialize` function can be optionally implemented by provider authors.

Author: I've tried to removed the ambiguity. Please check again this makes sense.

Many feature flag frameworks or SDKs require some initialization before they can be used.
They might require the completion of an HTTP request, establishing persistent connections, or starting timers or threads.
The `initialization` function is an ideal place for such logic.

```java
// MyProvider implementation of the initialize function defined in Provider
class MyProvider implements Provider {
  //...

  // the global context is passed to the initialization function
  void initialize(EvaluationContext initialContext) {
    /*
      A hypothetical initialization function: connect to a flag database, then pass a callback which fires PROVIDER_READY
    */
    this.connectToDatabase(() => this.emitEvent(ProviderEvents.READY));
  }

  //...
}
```

### 2.5. Provider context reconciliation

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

> Static-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

Author: I went back and forth on this myself. I can go either way. I'll leave this comment unresolved so people can agree/disagree and I'll close it when we have a consensus.

> Static-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

Reviewer 4: I prefer "context change" in this case.

> Static-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

Reviewer 5: Yea I agree with "context change" here, as the initial context which the provider will fetch its results for is set during `initialize()`.

#### Requirement 2.5.1

> > The provider interface **MUST** define an `on context set` handler, which takes an argument for the previous context, and the newly set context, and which can be optionally implemented to reconcile any stored state pertaining to the global evaluation context.

Author: ```suggestion
> The provider **MAY** define an `on context set` handler, which takes an argument for the previous context, and the newly set context, and reconciles any stored state pertaining to the global evaluation context.
```

> > The provider interface **MUST** define an `on context set` handler, which takes an argument for the previous context, and the newly set context, and which can be optionally implemented to reconcile any stored state pertaining to the global evaluation context.

Reviewer 6: There's a lot of overly specifying about what the interface must be. This kinda feels wrong to me. Not all languages have interfaces. I would prefer that we talk about what providers may do, and what the sdk must do if they do that.

Instead of saying "the provider interface must define a handler".. I'd rather this read: "Providers may register a context change handler. Separately, if the context changes, the sdk must call that handler".

Author: Thinking about it more, there's a few places where I've used **MUST** to describe optional fields/methods. I think generally, that you're right, and this can be converted to **MAY**, mentioning the specific constrcut. For example

`The provider interface MUST have optional field X which does Y` 

becomes:

`The provider MAY have X which does Y`.

I think this is generally better and and I've applied it in a few places.

> > The provider interface **MUST** define an `on context set` handler, which takes an argument for the previous context, and the newly set context, and which can be optionally implemented to reconcile any stored state pertaining to the global evaluation context.

Reviewer 3: just personal taste I suppose, but I prefer `on context changed` to `on context set`. Set sounds like something that only happens once, changed seems more like something that can occur multiple times.

Reviewer 3: Also, I really like that we're passing the old context in addition to the new context 👍

Reviewer 2: +1 to "on context changed". That is more in line with existing naming conventions across the industry.

> Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs my maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.
```

The `on context set` handler provides a mechanism to update this state, often by re-evaluating flags in bulk with respect to the new context.

```java
// MyProvider implementation of the onContextSet function defined in Provider
class MyProvider implements Provider {
  //...

  onContextSet(EvaluationContext oldContext, EvaluationContext newContext): void {
    // update context-sensitive cached flags, or otherwise react to the change in the global context 
  }

  //...
}
```

see: [static-context paradigm](../glossary.md#static-context-paradigm)

### 2.6. Shutdown

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

#### Requirement 2.6.1

> > The provider interface **MUST** define a `shutdown` or `dispose` function, which can be optionally implemented to perform whatever cleanup or shutdown is necessary for the provider implementation.

Reviewer 2: Why **must**? Why not make it optional? If the provider doesn't need to do anything on shutdown, why not have a default (no-op) method in the interface so the provider doesn't have to do anything?

It's not hugely important, as implementing a no-op method is trivial anyway. I'm just curious as to why it's mandatory.

  void dispose() {
    // close connections, terminate threads or timers, etc...
  }
```

### 2.6. Provider context reconciliation

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

> Static-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

Reviewer 5: +1 for `on context changed`

> Static-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

Author: Ya - it was "Set" and I updated it to "changed" after some feedback, but I missed this spot. I'll do a few more searches to make sure there's no other occurrences.

> Static-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on-context-set` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

Author: fixed.

#### Requirement 2.6.1

> The provider **MAY** define an `on context changed` handler, which takes an argument for the previous context and the newly set context, and reconciles any stored state pertaining to the global evaluation context.

> Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.

Reviewer 5: why `local state` over `local cache`, is describing it as a `cache` too specific? I think describing it as a `cache` is likely easier to understand.

> Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.

Author: I think I agree with @jonathannorris on this one. Because this is more of an example and not normative text, I think the use of "cache" is more concrete and helpful in communicating the idea.

> Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.

Reviewer 7: I think the "pertaining to flag evaluations" versus "evaluated flags" part may be more important. An SDK may have local state which it uses to perform evaluations, or it may have local state which is fully evaluated, maybe the state that changes isn't directly flags at all, but segmenting information, or metadata used to drive analytics.

> Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.

Reviewer 7: "maintain state for a particular context"

Though, it is probably also fine as is, because it isn't normative.

> Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.

Author: :thinking:

> Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain a cache of evaluated flags for a particular context.

Author: I've gone with `maintain state for a particular context` as @kinyoklion  recommends, which (I think) satisfies @moredip 's original concern and reads a bit better.

  void dispose() {
    // close connections, terminate threads or timers, etc...
  }
```

### 2.6. Provider context reconciliation

[![experimental](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=Status&message=experimental&color=orange)](https://github.com/open-feature/spec/tree/main/specification#experimental)

Static-context focused providers may need a mechanism to understand when their cache of evaluated flags must be invalidated or updated. An `on context changed` handler can be defined which performs whatever operations are needed to reconcile the evaluated flags with the new context.

#### Requirement 2.6.1

> The provider **MAY** define an `on context changed` handler, which takes an argument for the previous context and the newly set context, in order to respond to an evaluation context change.

Especially in static-context implementations, providers and underlying SDKs may maintain state for a particular context.

> The `on context changed` handler provides a mechanism to update this state, often by re-evaluating flags in bulk with respect to the new context.

Reviewer 8: How will this look in an implementation 🤔  I assume this is called by SDK when global `EvaluationContext` is changed ?
